[[sec:formal-considerations]]
== Formal considerations

This section addresses the aspects of logics in the eProcurement
ontology. It specifies the semantics, the relationship between the
abstract layer of the ontology and the instance data, under what
assumptions is the inference done and what level of logical formalism
should the ontology components adapt in order to maintain flexibility
and reasoning capacity.

[[sec:model-data]]
=== Model and data relationship

DL ontologies are structured into two sets: _ABox_ and _TBox_. The
_ABox_ consists of all (class or property) instance assertions. The
_TBox_ consists of all terminological axioms, i.e., of all subclass
inclusion axioms. The ABox provides information about concrete
individuals while the TBox describes general rules that hold for all
individuals. In consequence, ABoxes tend to be much larger than TBoxes .
In Figure #fig:abox-tbox[3] is depicted the delimitation and relations
between the TBox and box ABox components of the eProcurement ontology.

image::../img/ontology.png[The relationship between the data and each of
the ontology components,scaledwidth=99.0%]

To explain the relevance of each component, in Figure #fig:abox-tbox[3],
two arbitrary datasets are brought as examples. They instantiate the
core ontology, which means that they comprise of factual statements of
concrete entities of eProcurement classes. In order to ensure that the
instance data follow minimally the intended ontology design they need to
comply with a set of data shapes. Once this condition is satisfied,
then, new knowledge can be inferred from the provided facts, given the
domain inference rules. The new knowledge is mainly oriented to solve
the classification task and does not cover other types of inference.

It is important to note that the data shapes fall out of the TBox as
they serve the validation function and are based on a different set of
assumptions. First, they are interpreted under the closed world
assumption, like in XML or RDBM contexts (see Section
#sec:world-assumption[2.3]). Secondly, they follow a RDF graph based
semantics #sec:semantics[2.2].

[[sec:semantics]]
=== Semantics

Users of OWL <<OWL>> can actually select between two slightly different
semantics: _direct semantics_ that corresponds to the Description Logics
(DL) , and _RDF-based semantics_ that is based on translation of the OWL
axioms into directed graphs. In this document we assume by default the
direct semantics. In particular cases (i.e. SPARQL entailments and SHACL
data shapes) RDF-based semantics is adopted and is explicitly mentioned
in the document.

Description logics provide a concise language for OWL axioms and
expressions. DLs are characterised by their expressive features. The
description logic that supports all class expressions with
latexmath:[$>, \bot, \sqcap, \sqcup, \neg, \exists$] and
latexmath:[$\forall$] is known as latexmath:[$\mathcal{ALC}$] (which
originally used to be an abbreviation for Attribute Language with
Complement). For a formal introduction into DL please consult .

Inverse properties are not supported by latexmath:[$\mathcal{ALC}$], and
the DL we have introduced above is actually called
latexmath:[$\mathcal{ALCI}$] (for latexmath:[$\mathcal{ALC}$] with
inverses) . Many description logics can be defined by simply listing
their supported features. The letter latexmath:[$\mathcal{S}$] is often
used as an abbreviation for the ``basic'' DL consisting of
latexmath:[$\mathcal{ALC}$] extended with transitive roles (which in the
latexmath:[$\mathcal{AL}$] naming scheme would be called
latexmath:[$\mathcal{ALCR+}$] ).

The letter latexmath:[$\mathcal{H}$] represents sub-roles (role
Hierarchies), latexmath:[$\mathcal{O}$] represents nominals (nOminals),
latexmath:[$\mathcal{I}$] represents inverse roles (Inverse),
latexmath:[$\mathcal{N}$] represent number restrictions (Number), and
latexmath:[$\mathcal{Q}$] represent qualified number restrictions
(Qualified).

The integration of a concrete domain/datatype is indicated by appending
its name in parenthesis, but sometimes a ``generic''
latexmath:[$\mathcal{D}$] is used to express that some concrete
domain/datatype has been integrated. The DL corresponding to the OWL DL
ontology language includes all of these constructors and is therefore
called latexmath:[$\mathcal{SHOIN(D)}$]. We will use this notation when
discussing degrees of expressivity for the ontology layers in Section
#sec:expressivity[2.4].

Computing all interesting logical conclusions of an OWL ontology can be
a challenging problem, and reasoning is typically multi-exponential or
even undecidable. To address this problem, the recent update OWL 2 of
the W3C standard introduced three profiles: _OWL EL_, _OWL RL_, and _OWL
QL_. These lightweight sublanguages of OWL restrict the available
modelling features in order to simplify reasoning. This has led to large
improvements in performance and scalability, which has made the OWL 2
profiles very attractive for practitioners .

On the other hand, the validation data shapes are expressed using Shapes
Constraint Language (SHACL) . Its semantics is based on RDF graphs but
full RDFS inferencing is not required. SHACL processors may operate on
RDF graphs that include RDF entailments and SPARQL specific entailments
. The entailment regime specifies conditions that address the fourth
condition on extensions of basic graph pattern matching .

This architecture delimits different concerns in Section
#sec:layers-components[1.2] in a stack of layers and assigns levels of
expressivity to each of the layers in Section #sec:expressivity[2.4].

[[sec:world-assumption]]
=== Open and closed world assumptions

In the formal systems of logic used for knowledge representation,
reasoning is the process through which logical conclusions are derived
from a set of premises known to be true or assumed to be true by the
laws of valid inference (inference rules).

In the eProcurement ontology checking consistency and deriving new
knowledge is foreseen as a valuable functionality beyond the knowledge
representation and interoperability establishment.

Inferencing is impacted by what is assumed about the knowledge base. The
important assumptions to consider are: (a) whether the knowledge base is
considered complete – the closed-world assumption (CWA); or (b) whether
the knowledge base (proper knowledge base) is in a state of continuous
progression – the open-world assumption (OWA) .

Under the _closed-world assumption_ it is the presumed that a statement
that is true is also known to be true. Therefore, conversely, what is
not currently known to be true, is false . The opposite of the
closed-world assumption is the _open-world assumption_ stating that lack
of knowledge does not imply falsity. The truth value of a statement may
be true irrespective of whether or not it is known to be true.

The eProcurement data is fragmented across information systems. It
represents concerns specific to different steps in the procurement
process. Performing local reasoning with such incomplete knowledge is
therefore necessary functionality for the eProcurement project.

Semantic Web languages, including OWL, make the open-world assumption.
The absence of a particular statement within the web means, in
principle, that the statement has not been made explicitly yet,
irrespective of whether it would be true or not, and irrespective of
whether we believe that it would be true or not. This stance is also
very convenient for decentralised knowledge bases over the internet,
where information may be accessible, outdated, contradictory,
inaccessible or missing .

For validation purposes, in particular, a closed world assumption needs
to be made. This concerns the data shapes expressed in SHACL language.
In this case, the knowledge base must be considered complete in order to
assess whether it fulfils the imposed constraints or recommended shapes.
Therefore, everything that is not known to be true must be considered as
false.

The eProcurement data must be validated within its local context. The
data must be conformant to the information needs and aspects specific to
the procurement phase and, possibly, to the information system that
handles it. It is, therefore, foreseeable that multiple validation
schemes and application profiles have to be developed specific to
different phases and aspects of the procurement process. These schemes
must extend and flesh out the core ontology, which is the ontology
backbone, with levels of specificity and detail as necessary.


